Session 7: AADK Task 7 – Building Stateful and Calculative Apps
Objective

The goal of this session is to understand how state and logic work together in Jetpack Compose to build interactive and calculative applications. Students learn how to capture user input, process data, and update the UI dynamically.

Understanding Stateful Apps

A stateful app is an application where the user interface changes based on user input or data updates. In Jetpack Compose, this is handled using state variables that trigger recomposition whenever their values change.

Example of state declaration:

var amount by remember { mutableStateOf("") }

When the value of amount changes, Compose automatically updates the UI.

UI Components Used

Stateful and calculative apps commonly combine multiple UI elements such as:

TextField – to capture user input

Slider – to adjust numeric values (e.g., percentage)

Switch – to enable or disable options

Button – to perform actions

Text – to display calculated results

These elements work together to create an interactive interface.

Example Concept: Tip Calculator

A typical example of a calculative app is a Tip Calculator.

The app allows the user to:

Enter the bill amount

Select the tip percentage using a slider

Enable round-up option using a switch

Display the calculated tip amount

Example logic:

val tip = amount * tipPercent / 100

When the user changes the amount or percentage, the UI recalculates and updates automatically.

Importance of Data Flow

Structured data flow ensures that:

User input is stored as state

Logic processes the state

UI components update automatically

This approach makes the application reactive and easy to maintain.

Benefits of Stateful Calculative Apps

Dynamic UI updates

Better user interaction

Clear separation of logic and UI

Improved maintainability

Conclusion

Stateful and calculative apps demonstrate how Jetpack Compose manages data and UI together. By combining input components, validation, and state-driven logic, developers can build responsive applications that update instantly based on user interaction.